Update observability docs (#250)
openservicemesh/osm-docs: content/docs/guides/observability/metrics.md

---
title: "Metrics"
description: "Proxy and OSM control plane Prometheus metrics"
type: docs
weight: 1
---

# Metrics
Open Service Mesh (OSM) generates detailed metrics related to all traffic within the mesh and the OSM control plane. These metrics provide insights into the behavior of applications in the mesh and the mesh itself helping users to troubleshoot, maintain and analyze their applications.

OSM collects metrics directly from the sidecar proxies (Envoy). With these metrics the user can get information about the overall volume of traffic, errors within traffic and the response time for requests.

Additionally, OSM generates metrics for the control plane components. These metrics can be used to monitor the behavior and health of the service mesh.

OSM uses [Prometheus][1] to gather and store consistent traffic metrics and statistics for all applications running in the mesh. Prometheus is an open-source monitoring and alerting toolkit which is commonly used on (but not limited to) Kubernetes and Service Mesh environments.

> Each application that is part of the mesh runs in a Pod which contains an Envoy sidecar that exposes metrics (proxy metrics) in the Prometheus format. Furthermore, every Pod that is a part of the mesh has Prometheus annotations, which makes it possible for the Prometheus server to scrape the application dynamically. This mechanism automatically enables scraping of metrics whenever a pod is added to the mesh.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each application that is part of the mesh runs in a pod which contains an Envoy sidecar that exposes metrics (proxy metrics) in the Prometheus format. Furthermore, every pod that is a part of the mesh has Prometheus annotations, which makes it possible for the Prometheus server to scrape the application dynamically. This mechanism automatically enables scraping of metrics whenever a pod is added to the mesh.
```

instance. We call the latter pattern "Bring-Your-Own" or "BYO". The sections below describe how to configure metrics by allowing OSM
to automatically provision the metrics components and with the BYO method.

### Automatic Provisioning

By default, both Prometheus and Grafana are disabled.

> However, when configured with the `--set=OpenServiceMesh.deployPrometheus=true` flag, OSM installation will deploy a Prometheus instance to scrape the sidecar's metrics endpoints. Based on the metrics scraping configuration set by the user, OSM will annotate pods part of the mesh with necessary metrics annotations to have Prometheus reach and scrape the pods to collect relevant metrics. The [scraping configuration file](https://github.com/openservicemesh/osm/blob/main/charts/osm/templates/prometheus-configmap.yaml) defines the default Prometheus behavior and the set of metrics collected by OSM.

Reviewer: parameterize link per #253 ?

> However, when configured with the `--set=OpenServiceMesh.deployPrometheus=true` flag, OSM installation will deploy a Prometheus instance to scrape the sidecar's metrics endpoints. Based on the metrics scraping configuration set by the user, OSM will annotate pods part of the mesh with necessary metrics annotations to have Prometheus reach and scrape the pods to collect relevant metrics. The [scraping configuration file](https://github.com/openservicemesh/osm/blob/release-v0.9/charts/osm/templates/prometheus-configmap.yaml) defines the default Prometheus behavior and the set of metrics collected by OSM.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, when configured with the `--set=OpenServiceMesh.deployPrometheus=true` flag, OSM installation will deploy a Prometheus instance to scrape the sidecar's metrics endpoints. Based on the metrics scraping configuration set by the user, OSM will annotate pods part of the mesh with necessary metrics annotations to have Prometheus reach and scrape the pods to collect relevant metrics. The [scraping configuration file](https://github.com/openservicemesh/osm/blob/main/charts/osm/templates/prometheus-configmap.yaml) defines the default Prometheus behavior and the set of metrics collected by OSM.
```

> To install Grafana for metrics visualization, set the `--set=OpenServiceMesh.deployGrafana=true` flag to true when installing OSM using the `osm install` command. OSM provides a pre-configured dashboard that is documented in [OSM Grafana dashboards](#osm-grafana-dashboards).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To install Grafana for metrics visualization, pass the `--set=OpenServiceMesh.deployGrafana=true` flag to the `osm install` command. OSM provides a pre-configured dashboard that is documented in [OSM Grafana dashboards](#osm-grafana-dashboards).
```

      target_label: source_workload_name
```

#### Grafana

The following section assumes a Prometheus instance has already been configured as a data source for a running Grafana instance. Refer to the [Prometheus and Grafana](/docs/demos/prometheus_grafana) demo for an example on how to create and configure a Grafana instance.

##### Importing OSM Dashboards

> The OSM dashboards (if desired) can be imported through several mechanism to the external Grafana instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The OSM dashboards (if desired) can be imported through several mechanisms to the external Grafana instance.
```

OSM Dashboards are available both through:

> - [OSM repository](https://github.com/openservicemesh/osm/tree/release-v0.9/charts/osm/grafana), and are importable as json blobs through the web admin portal

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [OSM repository](https://github.com/openservicemesh/osm/tree/main/charts/osm/grafana), and are importable as json blobs through the web admin portal
```

- or [online at Grafana.com](https://grafana.com/grafana/dashboards/14145).

Detailed instructions for importing OSM dashboards can be found in the [Prometheus and Grafana](/docs/demos/prometheus_grafana) demo. Refer to [OSM Grafana dashboard](#osm-grafana-dashboards) for an overview of the pre-configured dashboards.

## Metrics scraping

Metrics scraping can be configured using the `osm metrics` command. By default, OSM **does not** configure metrics scraping for pods in the mesh. Metrics scraping can be enabled or disabled at namespace scope such that pods belonging to configured namespaces can be enabled or disabled for scraping metrics.

For metrics to be scraped, the following prerequisites must be met:

- The namespace must be a part of the mesh, ie. it must be labeled with the `openservicemesh.io/monitored-by` label with an appropriate mesh name. This can be done using the `osm namespace add` command.

> - A running service able to scrape Prometheus endpoints. OSM provides configuration for an [automatic bringup of Prometheus](#automatic-bring-up); alternatively users can [bring their own Prometheus](#prometheus).

Reviewer 2: Looks like the link to `#automatic-bring-up` is broken. Should this be `#automatic-provisioning` instead?

prometheus.io/path: /stats/prometheus
```

> When metrics are disabled for a previously enabled meshed namespace, the existing pods in the namespace will still configured for scraping. The pods must be recreated for the annotation to be removed. All future pods added to a namespace with metrics disabled will not be updated with the Prometheus annotations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When metrics are disabled for a previously enabled meshed namespace, the existing pods in the namespace will still be configured for scraping. The pods must be recreated for the annotation to be removed. All future pods added to a namespace with metrics disabled will not be updated with the Prometheus annotations.
```

When metrics are disabled for a previously enabled meshed namespace, the existing pods in the namespace will still configured for scraping. The pods must be recreated for the annotation to be removed. All future pods added to a namespace with metrics disabled will not be updated with the Prometheus annotations.

## Available Metrics

For details about what metrics are scraped from each Envoy proxy, see [Envoy's documentation](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/v1.17.2/operations/stats_overview). Note that OSM's default configuration only scrapes a subset of all metrics generated by each proxy.
OSM exports metrics about the traffic within the mesh as well as metrics about the control plane.

> #### Custom Metrics

Reviewer 2: I'm inclined to keep this heading as "Custom Metrics" (or "Custom Envoy Metrics") since this section only describes the metrics OSM adds to Envoy, not all of the Envoy metrics available.

Author: Updated to "Custom Envoy Metrics"

#### Known Gaps

- HTTP requests that invoke a local response from Envoy have "unknown" `destination_*` labels on metrics.
  - In the demo, this includes requests from the bookthief to the bookstore.
- Metrics are only recorded for traffic where both endpoints are part of the mesh. Ingress and egress traffic do not have statistics recorded.
- Metrics are recorded in Prometheus with all instances of '-' and '.' in tags converted to '\_'. This is because proxy-wasm adds tags to metrics through the name of the metric and Prometheus does not allow '-' or '.' in metric names, so Envoy converts them all to '\_' for the Prometheus format. This means a pod named 'abc-123' is labeled in Prometheus as 'abc_123' and metrics for pods 'abc-123' and 'abc.123' would be tracked as a single pod 'abc_123' and only distinguishable by the 'instance' label containing the pod's IP address.

### Control Plane

The following metrics are exposed in the Prometheus format by the OSM control plane components. The `osm-controller` and `osm-injector` pods have the following Prometheus annotation.

```yaml
annotations:
   prometheus.io/scrape: 'true'
   prometheus.io/port: '9091'
```

> <table>

Reviewer 2: For the sake of whoever has to update this later, does a markdown table work here instead?
